Define release process for components (#142)
projectsyn/documentation: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/how-tos/release-process.adoc

= Project Syn Tools Release Process

Releases often just require a new SemVer tag with `v`-prefix to be pushed, for example `v1.2.3`.

> == Pull request label usage

Author: I wonder if that section warrants a dedicated page. WDYT?

Reviewer: The section does feel a bit out of place here, I would move it to references or explanations and link it here where appropriate.

Author: Extracted to #143

. Check and update xref:tutorials/getting-started.adoc[Getting Started guide] and https://syn.tools/tuto/index.html[Tutorial: Writing your First Commodore Component] (These guides need to be up-to-date and work 100% all the time)

=== Additional work for major releases

If a "major" release is being done, the following additional work needs to be done:

* Update the https://github.com/projectsyn/documentation/blob/master/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/roadmap.adoc[Roadmap]
* Write a blogpost and spread it on social media
* Close the associated GitHub project and internal Jira project (if applicable)

== Commodore Components

Commodore Components are to be tagged with SemVer with `v<major>.<minor>.<patch>[-rc<rc>]` pattern (optionally includes Release candidates tagging).

.Version examples
====
* `v1.0.0`
* `v1.2.3-rc1`
====

[NOTE]
====

> Generally, using `v0.x` versions are discouraged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, we discourage the use of `v0.x` versions.
```

> After the first initial implementation, users are requested to directly release `v1.0.0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, we recommend that developers directly release `v1.0.0` after the initial implementation is complete.
```

> Use release candidates suffix (for example `-rc1`) if "beta" versions are really needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a prerelease version is required, developers can use a release candidate suffix (for example `-rc1`).
```

====

> The changelog is generated via GitHub Actions and is based on labelling PullRequests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The changelog is generated via GitHub Actions and is based on pull request labels.
```

> The following GitHub labels require certain SemVer version increments:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following GitHub PR labels require certain SemVer version increments:
```

|===
| Label | Increment

| `bug`, `fix`, `change`, `dependency`

> | Patch

Reviewer: Some remarks here:
* IMO, `change` can require a minor version bump, depending on the exact contents of the PR
* `dependency` can be anything from patch up to major depending on the changes present in the dependency.

Author: Hm, I would argue that `dependency` is coming from software development, but we do have component with dependent components. However, if those are updated with a major version, causing also a breaking change in "this" component, then `breaking` is a much more appropriate label than `dependency`.
To me, the label `dependency` should only be used if there's a (someday automated) dependency update that doesn't cause changes otherwise (we see those in Helm charts a lot for example). If they do cause changes, other labels would be more appropriate IMO.

`change` is probably only needed when something on the structure of the repository itself has changed (e.g. updated CI/CD pipeline), those don't warrant a minor version bump, maybe not even a new release (they will be added to the changelog on the next merged PR though). I see the only reason where `change` might be used for minor bump is for announcing deprecations, everything else is either `enhancement` or `fix`, or do you see other uses examples?

Reviewer: > Hm, I would argue that `dependency` is coming from software development, but we do have component with dependent components. However, if those are updated with a major version, causing also a breaking change in "this" component, then `breaking` is a much more appropriate label than `dependency`.
> To me, the label `dependency` should only be used if there's a (someday automated) dependency update that doesn't cause changes otherwise (we see those in Helm charts a lot for example). If they do cause changes, other labels would be more appropriate IMO.

I understood label `dependency` as "this PR updates a dependency" which could be anything from a patch level to a major level update of the dependency.
 
> `change` is probably only needed when something on the structure of the repository itself has changed (e.g. updated CI/CD pipeline), those don't warrant a minor version bump, maybe not even a new release (they will be added to the changelog on the next merged PR though). I see the only reason where `change` might be used for minor bump is for announcing deprecations, everything else is either `enhancement` or `fix`, or do you see other uses examples?

I've used `change` for PRs which are neither a pure bugfix, nor adding a new feature, e.g. https://github.com/projectsyn/component-rancher-monitoring/pull/19 where we reimplemented functionality that previously existed.

Author: I've extracted the PR labeling issue into #143 . Let's continue the discussion there.

| `enhancement`
| Minor

| `breaking`
| Major
|===

> The release process is relatively simple:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The release process itself is straightforward:
```

. Identify which type of pull requests were merged since last release (fixes, enhancements or breaking changes) to decide on the next SemVer version number.
. Create and push a new Git tag on the default branch.

> . If there are no breaking changes since last release, bump the version number of the released component in the Commodore defaults repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. If there are no breaking changes since the last release, immediately bump the version number of the released component in the Commodore defaults repository.
```

> NOTE: If there _are_ breaking changes, you can only bump the version in the defaults once all clusters have been upgraded to the new version.

Reviewer: This note does not necessarily apply to Project Syn in general, and is much more an artifact of how we use Project Syn at the moment.

Additionally, it might be worth to outline a rough set of steps for rolling out breaking changes . There's two broad categories of such changes:

* Breaking changes which can be automatically rolled out with appropriate upgrade jobs in the component (e.g. https://github.com/projectsyn/component-cert-manager/releases/tag/v2.0.0)
* Breaking changes which require changes in the config hierarchy (e.g. https://github.com/appuio/component-openshift4-authentication/releases/tag/v2.0.0)

For the first category, it's generally sufficient to upgrade the component version.
For the second category, each instance of the changed configuration parameters needs to be updated before updating the component version to ensure cluster catalogs still compile with the new component version.

Author: I've tried to capture your thoughts in the latest commits

=== Breaking changes

Pull request authors and reviewers are obliged to correctly identify breaking changes.

> Breaking changes include:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following changes are examples of breaking changes:
```

* Changes of existing parameters in default configuration (new optional or default parameters should't be breaking).
* Changes that require manual upgrade steps when upgrading the component version.

> * Removal of existing behaviour or features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Removal of existing behaviour or features.
* Upgrade of a dependency which contains breaking changes.

NOTE: This list doesn't cover all possible breaking changes.
```
